# APOSTLE HERODION

The memory of the Apostle Herodion is celebrated together with other early Christian preachers of the word of God, Agabus, Asyncritus, Rufus, Philegon, Hermas and others. The saints are mentioned in Romans chapter 16, verses 11, 13 and 14. “Greet Herodion my kinsman,” Paul writes, and then adds: “Greet Asyncritus, Philegon, Hermas, Patrobas, Hermas, and the other brothers with them.” According to the Orthodox liturgical calendar, their memory is celebrated on April 21 (8).

Greek tradition calls them Apostles of the Seventy, while ancient Roman tradition considers them disciples and companions of Paul. The ancient Roman martyrology considered the celebration of Agabus and Rufus on separate days from others. In the Eastern Orthodox Church, their memory is celebrated together on the same day. Let us add that the Western church tradition, unlike the Eastern one, prefers to talk not about seventy apostles, but about 70 disciples. In addition, according to some ancient lists, their number was 72. Like the 70 translators of the Bible into Greek in Alexandria, they, by their very number, testified to the commandment to preach Christ to all nations (cf. Matthew 28:19).

Ancient Church father Hippolytus of Rome (+236) believed that Herodion was a bishop in Tarsus. However, another tradition says that he accompanied Paul during his second imprisonment in Rome. Then he headed the local Christian community in the Greek city of Patras. His preaching led many to believe, for which he was martyred by Jews from the local community due to envy. Christianity had not yet become a “separate religion,” so Jesus’ disciples were killed “out of the will to stop grace.”

According to Paul himself in the Epistle, Herodion was his relative. We do not have more precise information. The first Christians expected the immediate return of the Lord at the Second Coming, and therefore did not retain any information about themselves. Centuries later, apocrypha and preachers tried to fill this gap with their inventions. In doing so, they testified to their ignorance of this core belief and expectation of the early Christians. For modern theology it is obvious that the Biography of the disciples of that first time was Jesus Himself.

The name Herodion, in Russian Rodion, is a diminutive of the Greek "Herod", which appears to be derived from the Greek word for "hero". Originally from Tarsus, like Paul, Herodion was Hellenized by his upbringing and education. This allowed him to preach in different countries and help Paul in his labors. Speaking in other tongues is a former gift, the essence of which is not clear to interpreters. Evangelism was hard work. Experience and knowledge multiplied by grace. Speaking in other tongues was a special gift, the essence of which is not clear to interpreters. Evangelism was hard work. It was experience and knowledge multiplied by grace. The apostles “did not fly through the air,” but they traveled a lot and walked a lot.

In our liturgical book, the Menaion, a separate service is dedicated to the Apostle Herodion and his companions. The Canon of Saints was written by a 9th-century author, St. Joseph the Hymnographer (816–886), who was a great holy hymnographer. In the text, Herodion is called “the great citizen of the city of Patras, who brought his fatherland to the Heavenly City.” Thus, the example of the Apostle teaches us to proclaim Christ in our native places. Where does the true homeland begin? It begins from the gospel of Christ.
