# APOSTLE MATTHEW

On November 29 (16), the Church celebrates the memory of the Apostle and Evangelist Matthew. According to the ancient authors, Rufinus of Aquileia (340–410), Eucherius of Lyons (380–450) and the church historian Socrates (380–439), Matthew preached in Ethiopia. One of the most ancient Menologions, the Martyrology of Jerome, Ambrose of Milan (339–397), and Paulinus of Nola (353–431) said that he preached the gospel of Jesus Christ in Persia. Ancient evidence has been preserved that Matthew also preached Christ in Pontus, in Syria, Macedonia and even Ireland. The early Christians lived in anticipation of the imminent Second Coming of the Lord. Therefore, detailed information about the biographies of the Apostles was not preserved.

The life of the Apostle is inseparable from the Gospel he wrote. The evangelist shows that Jesus is the true Messiah, in whom the Old Testament prophecies are fulfilled. Jesus' genealogy indicates that He is the Son of David. The birth from the Virgin fulfills the prophecy of Isaiah (Is. 7:14), and the indication of the city of Bethlehem confirms the testimony of the prophet Micah about the birthplace of the Messiah (Mic. 5: 2).

All chapters of the Gospel are arranged in a harmonious sequence, as if an experienced teacher was addressing his disciples with a special edifying plan. Following the Sermon on the Mount (chapters 5–7), Matthew gives evidence of the Lord’s miracles (8–9), speaks of the calling of the Apostles (10), and then cites the parables spoken by Jesus (13).

After the words about the murder of John the Baptist by Herod, with which the 14th chapter begins (14:1-12), the Gospel of Matthew tells about the first multiplication of the loaves, the walking on the waters, the removal to the lands of Tire and Sidon, the healing of the daughter of a Canaanite woman, the second multiplication of the loaves, the confession of Peter, the Transfiguration, many healings and teachings, among which a special place is occupied by the parables of the workers of the vineyard, the evil husbandmen, the ten virgins, and the wedding feast, and those called and chosen (14-23).

The evangelist's knowledge of the Old Testament texts is so deep and consistent that in modern times researchers have been able to reproduce almost word for word the texts of the Gospel of Matthew, in the form of references to Old Testament traditions and biblical texts.

Some ancient authors said that the Gospel of Matthew was originally written in Hebrew. By this they meant Aramaic, which was the spoken language of Palestine and the language of international communication in the Middle East during the earthly life of the Lord. Aramaic was not a written language, nor did it become the language of the sacred books.

Therefore, most likely, the Hebrew original of the Gospel of Matthew should be understood as the Apostle’s notes, his memories and testimonies, which he, as a professional tax collector, which he was before his conversion, scrupulously and carefully preserved. It is important that the tradition of the Church has never questioned the continuity between the original Aramaic and the supposedly “subsequent” Greek version of the Gospel texts. What Matthew wrote down formed the basis for the complete text of the inspired Gospel he compiled several decades after Pentecost.
