# DOSITHEUS OF GAZA

On March 4, the Church commemorates the memory of Dosipheus of Gaza. The saint was a disciple of the famous founding father of monasticism, theologian, and writer Abba Dorotheus. His life was recorded by a contemporary, unknown by name, who was another disciple of Abba Dorotheus. In his sermon on renunciation of the world, Dorotheus praises the monastic virtue of Dositheus and cites the testimony of a certain great elder about his attainment of Heavenly Glory. The memory of the holy ascetic is the Church's gratitude for the great ascetic tradition that once flourished in the monasteries of Gaza. Dositheus was a disciple of Abba Dorotheus, who lived in the monastery of Abba Seridus. This monastery was part of the spiritual tradition associated with Barsanuphius the Great and his disciple and fellow prayer companion, John the Prophet.

Raised in wealth and luxury, Dosipheus was at the very beginning of his military career. As an aide to a high-ranking Roman officer, he was once instructed by his superiors to visit Jerusalem. His friends accompanied him to the Holy City. There, contemplating the scene of the Last Judgment, he was terrified by the image of eternal torment. Then he was granted a vision of the Mother of God, who taught him how to be saved. His friends brought him to the monastery of Abba Seridus, where he remained forever. The conversion that Dosipheus experienced is remarkably similar to that of Mary of Egypt. The only difference is that we know nothing about his life before that. We also do not know whether "Dosipheus" was his monastic name or whether he received it at baptism. This Greek name translates as "Given by God."

The events took place around 530. Under the leadership of Abba Dorotheus, there was a hospital for the brethren in the monastery. With the blessing of Abba Seridus, Dosipheus came under the leadership of Abba Dorotheus. Carefully teaching him self-restraint in food, the reverend focused on skills in virtues that were consistent with those of a soldier. The elder taught him obedience, humility, and detachment from material things. Dorotheus himself was educated and well-read, while his disciple was childishly simple. The Story of Dosipheus is one of the first documents in history to mention the text of the Jesus Prayer. Prophetically knowing that he did not have long to live—Dositheus had tuberculosis—the elder told him to call on the name of the Lord without ceasing. When agony set in and his strength to pray was exhausted, the elder gave him absolution. "Go, my child, in peace, stand before the Holy Trinity and pray for us!"

The story of Dosipheus became an example of obedience to a spiritual father for subsequent generations of monks, and Dosipheus himself became an image of a true novice. However, there is something very important without which such a perception of the saint's image would remain incomplete. From the earliest times, the image of the Lord Jesus was very popular in the Roman army. There were many secret Christians among the soldiers. Proof of this is the multitude of martyrs of military rank who, from the very beginning of the persecution of Christians, professed their faith in the True God and suffered for Jesus: Andrew Stratelates, George the Victorious, Demetrius of Thessaloniki, Maurice, Mercurius, Sergius and Bacchus, Theodore Tyron, and many others. This great gathering of witnesses is hidden in the few names that have come down to us. The succession of conversion, confession, and obedience to the faith of the Roman martyr-warriors is remarkable. In a spiritual and ascetic sense, Dosipheus was one of them.

The story testifies that before his conversion, "Dositheus had never heard the word of God." And only "once the military leaders said in his presence that somewhere there was the City of Jerusalem." It turns out that once upon a time, when it was pagan, the army sought God. However, after becoming a "Christ-loving army," as the armies of Orthodox states are referred to in official texts and liturgical prayers, it often rapidly secularized. On the day of remembrance of the ascetic soldier Dositheus, who became a holy novice, this is a reminder and an important lesson.
