# EPHREM THE SYRIAN

Raised in faith in Christ by Saint James of Nisibis (+338), whom tradition rightly calls “Nicholas the Wonderworker” of the ancient Syrian Church, Ephraim accompanied this saint to the First Ecumenical Council in Nicaea in 325, and then defended the Orthodox teaching about the Holy Trinity in Nisibis and Edessa.

Tradition connects the name of Ephraim with the founding of the famous theological school in these ancient Christian missionary cities. Both cities were located on the Roman-Persian border and for a long time were centers for the spread of the gospel in the surrounding lands. The contact of Roman, Greek, Syrian and Persian civilizations contributed to the emergence of various traditions associated with the memory of the once glorious times of ancient Christianity.

The years of Ephraim’s life are 306–373. He was a deacon. In the 4th century, this was a special teaching ministry of the Ancient Church. Ephraim preached, taught, and prepared people for baptism. All his life Ephraim was a convinced ascetic. Extremely limiting himself in everything and remaining in prayer and contemplation, he wrote amazing hymns of praise to the Lord and God. At the same time, by gift from above, he could simultaneously devote himself entirely to serving his neighbors. He worked especially hard at the moment when, about a year before his death, a severe famine struck Edessa.

In the days and weeks preceding Lent, we, Orthodox Christians, are required to pay special attention to the liturgical calendar. Indeed, in addition to Sundays, each of which prepares believers for the blessed time of ascetic efforts, the Lord, with His invisible hand, like the stars in the sky, adorned the calendar with the memory of the great saints who shone in spiritual wisdom. One of them is Ephraim the Syrian, whose prayer will accompany the wandering Church during Lenten days.
