# GREAT MARTYR THEODOR STRATELATES

A mid-19th century Athos legend tells how, during renovation work at the Vatopedi Monastery, the relics of an ascetic were found. Unable to determine who this unknown saint was, they decided to glorify him with the name “Eudokimos,” which means ‘glorious’ or “surrounded by honor.” Years later, he made himself known in a vision. “My name was not Eudokimos, but you call me that and that's right,” was the message of the ascetic. A careful study of the life of St. Theodore Stratilates gives the impression that someone deliberately erased all differences between him and another saint of the same name, Theodore Tyron. The martyr Theodore Stratilates suffered for his faith in Christ in 319 during the reign of Emperor Licinius (308–324). During his martyrdom, he was crucified on the Cross, blinded by the arrows and killed, but God suddenly brought him back to life. This miraculous  sign led to the simultaneous conversion to the faith of many pagan soldiers, Theodore's brothers in arms. How can we not recall the words of the song of the same name by the Dire Straits: “Through these fields of destruction baptisms of fire I’ve witnessed your suffering As the battles raged higher”.

1 On February 21, the Church celebrates the memory of the holy great martyr Theodore Stratelates. With a difference of only ten calendar days, the memory of another martyr Theodore, Theodore Tyron, is commemorated. The Greek word Tyron means “new recruit,” and Stratelates means “commander,” “general,” or “commander-in-chief.”&#x20;

2 Both saints are called “great martyrs,” literally “great witnesses of the faith,” which indicates their royal, or very noble position in the social hierarchy of the time. Both saints were “dragontochtones,” literally “dragon killers,” meaning that each of them defeated a demonic dragon-like creature in his earthly life. Similar to the “kefalophores,” or “head-bearers,” martyrs who, after being beheaded, took their heads in their hands and could even speak, the “dragonslayers,” among them the great martyr George the Victorious, are one of the most difficult categories of saints to “decipher” and interpret. Theodore Tyron and Theodore Stratelates were such. At the same time, if “Stratelates-General” is much higher in his earthly rank than a “recruit,” then Theodore Tyron, compared to Theodore Stratelates, received much greater church veneration. The first Saturday of Great Lent is dedicated to him, and until the “translation” of the relics of the Evangelist Mark from Alexandria to Venice on January 31, 829, Saint Theodore Tyron was considered the heavenly patron of the capital of this unique colonial empire of the European Middle Ages.

3 Since the saints suffered for Christ at about the same time and lived in relatively the same region, present-day Anatolia, some researchers have concluded that this is a case of so-called duplication, a phenomenon in hagiography when the same saint is, as it were, split in two and begins to be venerated in two different “avatars.” The name Theodore means “God's gift,” and as a proper name, it was extremely common among both pagans and Christians. Therefore, the identity of the name and even the similarity of the feat are not sufficient grounds to deny the historicity of both. In the consciousness of the Orthodox Church and in popular piety, they live separately and are invoked as truly different saints.

4 In the Russian capital, there is a historic church dedicated to St. Theodore Stratelates, which has a double dedication to the martyr Theodore and to Archangel Gabriel. The church was first mentioned in chronicles as early as 1551, and since 1948, it has been home to the representative office of the Antiochian Church. Since May 9, 1977, Metropolitan Niphon of Philippopolis (born 1941) is serving there. Bishop Niphon passionately preaches about Saint Theodore on the days of his commemoration. His Eminence is truly a living history, a legendary figure, and a great friend of the Russian Church and the Russian people. During such sermons, the congregation feels as if they are listening to an ancient Eastern preacher, like John Chrysostom in ancient times.
