# LAURENCE OF TUROV

The ancient see of the modern Belarusian city of Turov was founded at the beginning of the second millennium. It is one of the oldest in the Russian Church. The succession of its hierarchy was interrupted for two centuries. Historians attribute this fact to the Mongol invasion. During this brief period, two canonized bishops served as bishops of Turov. They were the theologian and preacher Cyril II (1130–1182) and his successor, the hermit and exorcist Lawrence (1130–1194). Complete unity in perfect diversity is one of the definitions of ecclesiastical catholicity, a property of the Church, mistakenly but providentially translated in the Slavonic Symbol of Faith as conciliarity.

1 By the time Laurence entered the Kiev-Pechersk Monastery and wished to become a hermit, there had already been two examples of complete seclusion in the monastery. Both ended in disaster. The first monk, named Isaac, at some point mistook demons for angels in a vision, literally began to dance ritually with the devils, and lost his health and sanity; while the second, Nikita, through demonic power, through an ominous deception on the part of the forces of evil, gained the ability to false prophecy. Only the patience of the brethren, genuine love and care, helped both ascetics to recover physically and spiritually. Therefore, it is obvious that Lawrence asked for the wrong thing and asked at the wrong time. He was categorically refused, but he, in a good sense, did not give up and went to a certain monastery of St. Demetrius of Thessaloniki, the exact location of which is a matter of dispute. Perhaps it was located in Kiev, was the second most important monastery after Pechersky, and its “rival,” but it is also possible that it was located in Suzdal.

2 Contrary to the expectations of his spiritual detractors, Laurentiy's experience proved to be favorable. He even received the gift of healing. Nevertheless, it seemed that something was missing, because a black cat had come between him and his failed brotherhood. Once, a possessed man was brought to him, who threw a log that ten men together could not lift with a single grip. How can we not remember the Bolshevik image of Lenin with a log and his Subbotniks! Laurence sent the possessed man to Kiev to the Pechersky monastery It is difficult to say what motivated him in this order. Was it an unwillingness to “get involved” with the demon, a fear of trials, an attempt to create spiritual provocation characteristic of holy fools, or a desire to humble the Kiev monks by showing their inability to cope with such a demoniac?

3 As the demoniac approached the monastery, the demon cried out that there were thirty monks in the monastery, each of whom could cast him out with a single word. In a vision from above, this word proved to be true. At that time, there were one hundred and eighty monks in the monastery. It turns out that every sixth of them was a miracle worker and an exorcist. Such a proportion is simply incredible. After serious trials, the demon was cast out, and the man became healthy. After that, Lavrenty himself joined the Pechersk brotherhood, from where he was elected to the episcopacy of Turov.
