# MARTYR NIKEPHOROS OF ANTIOCH IN PISIDIA

Saint Nikephoros is one of the lesser-known saints of Christian antiquity, whose lives contain great edification. Therefore, by God's providence, the celebration of his memory in the days leading up to Great Lent is very instructive and not accidental. Nicéphore's martyrdom is a feat of faithfulness to the commandment of love for God and neighbor. It is an amazing, authentic revelation of the words of the Lord Jesus in the Gospel of John: “Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends” (John 15:13). These words refer to Jesus and are revealed in the lives of the saints.

1 On February 22, the Church commemorates the holy martyr Nikephoros. Due to his place of origin and suffering in the historical region of Asia Minor, now Antalya, the saint is also known as Nikephoros of Pisidia. The martyr is one of many forgotten saints. His name is overshadowed by that of the Patriarch of Constantinople, Nikephoros the Confessor (758–828), who, half a millennium after the martyr of Antioch, staunchly opposed the iconoclastic Byzantine emperors in Constantinople. We do not know on which day Saint Patriarch Confessor was born; it is quite possible that the martyr was his heavenly patron.

2 According to his hagiographers, Nicéphore was a “simple citizen” of Antioch in Pisidia. This city should be distinguished from the great city of the same name in Syria on the Orontes River—modern-day Antakya, which was hit by a strong earthquake on February 6, 2023. Antioch of Pisidia was located near the modern Turkish city of Yalvaç in southwestern Asia Minor. Pisidia is a historical region with no access to the sea. The thirteenth chapter of the Book of Acts tells how, on their way from Cyprus to Iconium, the apostles Paul and Barnabas preached Christ in this Asia Minor Antioch. The Jews did not accept the preaching, and Paul, foretelling God's wrath for such rejection of the gospel, turned his words to the Gentiles. According to Acts, “the word of the Lord spread throughout the whole region” (Acts 13:49).

3 According to his biography, Nikephoros had a long friendship with a presbyter named Sapricius. Since the local Church had apostolic origins, Sapricius, despite the fact that Christianity was not a permitted religion, undoubtedly held a certain position in the local civic community and. Nikephoros, apparently, was not baptized. At some point, enmity arose between him and Sapricius. Nikephoros tried three times to reconcile with the presbyter, each time sending his relatives to him with a request for forgiveness. Each time he was refused, after which he went to ask for forgiveness himself. But even then, he was not heard. At that moment, the persecution of Emperor Valerian (253–260) broke out in the Empire. This persecution was not only bloody, but also sudden. It was preceded by three years of peace and the absence of any persecution by the imperial authorities.

4 It is important to remember that Valerian was the second successor to Emperor Decius (249–251), whose name was associated with the most brutal persecutions. In contrast to his predecessor, during whose reign he held the position of censor in the Empire, Valerian was initially very favorable toward Christian believers. Christian testimonies from contemporaries have preserved this information. Thus, Valerian's persecution was sudden. The great saints who, during the persecution of Decius, in accordance with the ancient rules of the Church, managed to hide from their persecutors, were killed under Valerian. Among them was the great hero of the faith of the African Church, St. Cyprian of Carthage (200–258). It was he who uttered the aphorism that became an axiom about Christian unity: “no salvation outside the Church!” The modern world has essentially rephrased this motto and lives by the principle: “There is no salvation outside the market.”

5 As under Decius, during the persecution of Valerian, many Christians purchased certificates of sacrifice to the gods for a bribe. Thus, on paper, they became pagans. The Church at that time immediately began to debate whether such a person who had renounced Christ could return to the faith through repentance. In this time, written petitions from confessors gained great power. Confessors were those who suffered for their faith but remained alive. The presbyter Sapricius also became such a confessor. He continued to feud with. This time, personal motives and church discord were mixed in this quarrel. Knowing that Sapricius had already become a confessor, Nikephoros again asked for forgiveness three times. But each time he heard a decisive “no.” Apparently, Sapricius, knowing the value of the intercession of confessors, did not want to “share” with his “enemy”, a simple citizen and even unbaptized, this part of his impeccability. Hagiographers are silent on this point, but it is possible that Nikephoros renounced his faith during the persecution. If he did not renounce it, then perhaps he fell under suspicion. This would explain why, apart from his personal desire for reconciliation, he so insistently asked for forgiveness. Perhaps he needed the intercession of a true confessor. Suddenly, another new wave of persecution broke out.

6 Sapricius was arrested. He truly felt ready to suffer for Christ as a martyr. He went to the place of torment, led by his persecutors. Then Nikephoros once again tried to ask for forgiveness. This time, he openly called Sapricius a martyr and confessor of the faith. Now, for the sake of belonging to the Church and salvation, he needed his intercession very much. But the priest remained adamant. This was so noticeable that even the executioners began to mock Nikephoros, considering such requests for forgiveness absurd. We have never seen such a madman as you. Why do you need to make peace with someone who is about to die?” the hagiography testifies. The semantics of this narrative are remarkable. Both Nikephoros and Sapricius witnessed three waves of persecution. Three times Nikephoros asked for forgiveness and three times it was refused. The refusal of forgiveness transformed into a renunciation of the faith, as if the moment he uttered the word "no," grace withdrew from the priest.

7 The mystery of divine predestination was fulfilled at the place of torment. Sapricius was suddenly seized with fear and asked for the opportunity to renounce his faith. Nikephoros begged the executioners to execute him instead of him. “I am a Christian and I believe in the Lord Jesus, whom Sapricius has renounced. Behead me in his place.” Thus, he laid down his life for his friend, was baptized with blood in confession, and became newborn in Christ Jesus. The early Christians called the days of the martyrs' deaths “birthdays.” The enigmatic lyrics of Metallica's famous song “Unforgiven” tell the story of a man who, due to circumstances in his life, called himself that. So as not to become so unforgiven, Nikephoros became a martyr suffering for another. For forgiveness in the New Testament is one of the names of God.
