# MARTYR TRYPHON

The memory of the holy martyr Trifon is celebrated on February 14, when the Western world celebrates Valentine's Day. Both saints, Trifon and Valentine, were real historical figures. Moreover, they were contemporaries and were killed for Christ at about the same time, but under different pagan rulers in the middle of the third century. Saint Valentine has fallen prey to commercialization, and his name has become a symbol of something to which he probably had little connection during his lifetime. The coincidence of the days of remembrance of the two ancient martyrs, Trifon according to the Julian calendar and Valentine according to the Gregorian calendar, helps those who remember Valentine to remember Trifon as well; it removes the inappropriate fairy-tale and saccharine kitsch from the image of St Valentine, who, like Trifon, suffered not for the sake of romance, but out of faith and love in Christ Jesus. At the same time, both saints, Tryphon and Valentin, pray before God day and night so that people do not lose loved ones and do not cry alone.

1 Saint Tryphon suffered for Christ in the famous ancient city of Nicaea around 250 during the persecution of Emperor Decius. This persecution of Christians was not only bloody, but also insidious. It was preceded by a long period of peace and absence of persecution by the pagan imperial authorities. The persecution was sudden. Many renounced their faith. Moreover, even some great saints, who later became martyrs and were glorified by the Church, chose to hide from their persecutors. Thus, Bishops Cyprian of Carthage (200-258) and Dionysius of Alexandria (190-264) left their places of residence and led their churches through letters. Many Christians paid bribes to obtain certificates confirming that they had made sacrifices to the gods.

2 At the same time, Christianity was spreading rapidly. There is ancient evidence that by that time, Christian preaching had reached the imperial family itself. According to the hagiographers, Tryphon healed the daughter of Emperor Gordian III (238–244) from demonic possession. The expulsion of evil forces has always been a sign of great boldness. Demons settled in a person suddenly, and there was always a special reason for this. In theological terms, such a reason is called God's permission. Those who wanted to cast out demons challenged the forces of evil. After all, the demons presumed that they had a right to possess the possessed. This is particularly evident in the book of Acts of the Apostles. "I know Jesus and I know Paul, but who are you?" the demon said to the sons of a Jewish priest who were trying to cast him out, then attacked and overpowered them (Acts 19:15-16).

3 When Decius ascended the throne, Tryphon, who had the gift of casting out demons, was captured. He was forced to renounce Christ and offer a sacrifice to the goddess Fortuna. In doing so, the pagans, like modern postmodern culture, apparently mocked the power of Christian miracles. They wanted to attribute it not to the One God, but to chance. History has preserved almost no other details of personal biography. However, this martyr for Christ, now dwelling before God in the communion of saints, has the great grace to help the Church and its members against attacks from demons, harmful insects, and wild animals. The name of Tryphon is mentioned in the text of the corresponding exorcism sequences and prayers with a request for intercession. There is much evidence of his help in the Church.

4 On Russian icons, Saint Trifon is depicted with a falcon in his hand. This is connected with the saint's miracle. During the reign of Ivan the Terrible in the mid-sixteenth century, falcons were used in royal hunting and were considered precious. One of the birds was lost, for which the tsar's falconer, who was responsible for the bird, faced execution. Exhausted from his unsuccessful search, he fell asleep in the countryside. Then Trifon appeared to him, and the falcon was right there. The tsar's servant was saved, and in honor of the saint, the Church of St. Trifon was built in the Russian capital, which has survived to this day. Even the militant atheistic Bolsheviks did not dare to destroy it. This miracle of St. Trifon indicates that the martyr intercedes for God's help in finding lost domestic animals and in dealing with the hardships they endure. This calling of the saint is especially relevant in our times of widespread loneliness, when for many, pets are the only consolation they can get. One cannot help but recall the words of our contemporary, Polish writer Janusz Wisniewski in the novel "Loneliness on the Net": "God, grant me to be at least a little like my dog ​​sees me."
