# MYROPE OF CHIOS

Very little information has been preserved about Saint Myrope. It is known that she suffered for Christ during the persecution of Decius (249–251). Being a native of the Greek island of Chios, or perhaps hiding on the island during persecution, the saint brought with her from Ephesus, that ancient apostolic capital of early Christian times, the tradition of anointing the blessed with the oil of the sick during the prayer at the tombs of the apostles and martyrs. Myrope used consecrated oil to help the suffering, especially those who suffered during persecution. The sick received healing.

For the sake of spreading preaching and multiplying grace in an environment of constant persecution, the Ancient Church, in fulfillment of the words of Paul (1 Cor. 12:9), received special gifts. The word “Myrope” itself is derived from the word myrrh. This means that the true name of the saint has not been preserved. In the memory of the Church, she was identified with her ministry.

At the same time, the martyr Isidore was killed in Chios for his faith in Christ (May 14 (27)). Together with another Christian named Ammonius, Myrope buried his body, abandoned by the pagans without burial. Realizing that the Roman soldiers guarding Isidore could be executed for this, she herself confessed to her crime. The saint was subjected to cruel scourging and died in prison from the suffering she endured.

In the short life of the martyr, everything is surprisingly consistent. Her virtues are evangelically consistent with each other: service to the sick, burial of the dead, compassion for those who could be punished for someone else's guilt and confession of faith. During the torture of Myrope, the martyr Isidore appeared and strengthened her in her torment. Thus, the visible manifestation of the communion of saints, the faith in which is spoken of in the Apostle’s Creed, became, even here and now, on earth, the apotheosis of its sanctification in Jesus Christ.
