# PORPHYRIUS OF GAZA

Saint Porphyrius of Gaza (347–420) was a contemporary of John Chrysostom, the famous translator of the Bible Jerome, Saint Augustine, and many other great Church Fathers. His activity coincided with the era known as the Golden Age of patristic writing. At that time, Christianity was widespread in Egypt, Syria, Palestine, and Asia Minor. Roman Africa and Italy were also Christianized. According to researchers, there were about two thousand bishops in the Orthodox Church at that time. At the same time, Gaza, a small area on the border between Egypt and Palestine, remained a bastion of paganism. It had its own philosophical and cultural tradition. The multitude of pagan temples testified to the fact that the local inhabitants were desperately resisting Christianization.

The Life of Saint Porphyrius is instructive and rich in detail. It was written by his disciple Peter, who was his deacon from 395 to 420, that is, in accordance with the practice of the Ancient Church, he was his closest assistant and secretary. Future bishops were often chosen from among the deacons. Saint Porphyrius was born in Thessaloniki, began his monastic life in Egypt, and then settled in Palestine. Falling ill with a serious disease, apparently cancer, he was no longer able to walk. Porphyrius spent a long time in prayer at the Holy Sepulchre. Then, in a vision, the Lord appeared to him, accompanied by the wise thief from the Gospel. Thus, Porphyrius was healed.

“Who can tell of your labors and illnesses leading to godly devotion, O Father? For you labored incessantly day and night, cleansing Gaza of its wickedness, and planting piety; therefore, as the protector of your flock, O Porphyrios, entreat Christ God for the salvation of our souls,” says the troparion to the saint. The bishop of Jerusalem ordained Porphyry as bishop of Gaza. For a quarter of a century, the saint worked to spread Christianity in this region. As a result of his efforts, the region became Christian and, moreover, subsequently developed its own theological tradition and monastic school. The life of Saint Porphyrius teaches us that nothing is impossible for God, and that missionary work is a great service and this is the path of thanksgiving. The word Eucharist means thanksgiving, and thanksgiving in Greek sounds like eucharist. A great multitude of people in Porphyrius’ time, as in our own time, did not believe in the One True God and Jesus Christ sent by Him (John 17:3). Through his missionary work, many came to faith, and the formerly pagan stronghold Gaza became a Christian region. Like bread in the liturgical prayer, the people became the Church, which is the Body of Christ. Saint Porphyrius testifies that Mission is akin to the Eucharist.
