# SAINT MARCIAN OF CYRUS

Marcian of Cyrus (+388) is one of the 36 Syrian ascetics about whom the Church Father Theodoret of Cyrus (393–458) wrote in his “Religious History.” This patericon briefly describes the life and teachings of ascetics who once lived in the Syrian desert and cities. Theodoret personally knew many of them.

It is useful to remember that the memory of these holy men and women is alternately celebrated by the Church in the period from January 13 to March 1 of the Julian calendar, that is, it covers the preparatory and initial time of Great Lent. In addition, some of them are, as it were, re-remembered in the Orthodox liturgical calendar of the Nativity Fast. It turns out that the liturgical calendar is literally “stitched” with the names of these saints. This repetition of the memory of the Syrian saints during the Lenten and Nativity fast periods is apparently explained by two different traditions of commemoration, which over the centuries have been united in the church calendar.

Marcian came from the city of Cyrus, located where in our times the Syrian border with Turkey passes. Ancient Cyrus has survived only in ruins, and the closest city to it remains the modern Turkish Kilis. According to Theodoret, Marcian was of very noble origin. He left the world and settled in the desert. Over time, disciples began to flock to him. Continuing his strict ascetic lifestyle, Marcian was awarded truly prophetic gifts, he could cast out demons and heal from diseases.

At the end of his life, having learned that believers in Cyrus and Chalcedon had already independently erected chapels in order to bury the saint in the future, Marcian bequeathed himself to the earth in an unknown place without a tombstone, which was done. Theodoret dedicated 23 chapters of his work to him, which is quite significant in the proportions of the Patericon. In some Slavonic liturgical calendars, Marcian is called “Cyrenean.” Such an erroneous appellation indicates the oblivion to which, unfortunately, this ancient Syrian saint was subjected. Time spares no one, it's true. But there should be no forgetting about those who have received the great grace of holiness among the people of God.
