# SAINT VINCENT OF LERINS

June 6 (May 24) The Church honors the memory of St. Vincent of Lerins (+450). The saint was a theologian, priest and ascetic. Named after the famous ancient monastery that still exists today on an island just opposite the French city of Cannes, Saint Vincent is one of the forgotten Orthodox saints of the Christian west. In 2017, exactly seven years ago, in fulfillment of the spiritual covenant of our contemporary, St. John of Shanghai (1896–1966), the name of St Vincent was included in the Orthodox liturgical calendar.

Very little information about St Vincent has been preserved. Presbyter and historian

Gennadius of Marseilles (+496) in his work “On Church Writers,” also known as a continuation of the ancient literary genre “On Famous Men,” in the 64th chapter says that Vincent was from Gaul. Gennady mentions to us the main work of the saint against heretics, known as “Commonitorium”. Gennadius reports that this work consisted of two parts, and the last “was stolen.” According to him, Vincent died under Emperor Theodosius the Younger (408–450), that is, before 450. In ancient times he was little known. Nowadays, both in the East and in the West, he is revered as one of the significant Fathers of the Church.

In the part of the “Commonitorium” that has come down to us, Vincent says that he was formerly a military man, apparently a Roman officer. In adulthood, “after wandering through various ill-fated paths of worldly life,” he came to the monastery, where “putting aside the arrogance of vanity,” he began to live in humility in order to appease God before the onset of the “fires of the coming age.” In his work, the title of which can also be translated “Reminder,” Vincent examines in detail the dogmatic errors of that time. This is the teaching of the Bishop of Constantinople Nestorius (385–451), condemned and deposed at the Third Ecumenical Council in Ephesus (431), as well as Arianism, and the teaching of Apollinaris of Laodicea (310-390).

Vincent's dogmatic definitions are very precise; the characteristics he gives to heretics and the motivations for their activities are informative and critical. He extremely emphasizes the role of the Ecumenical Councils in determining the true teaching. The name of Vincent was imprinted in the memory of subsequent generations thanks to his restrained attitude towards the teaching of St. Augustine of Hippo (354–430) on predestination. However, in the Commonitorium itself, Vincent sharply condemns Pelagius, and his accomplices in heresy, Celestius and Julian of Eclanum, with whom Augustine himself polemicized. By the way, Pelagianism was also condemned at the Council of Ephesus.

In modern times, the work of Saint Vincent has acquired particular relevance due to two very important dogmatic statements. Firstly, correct, truly catholic orthodox teaching cannot be simply invented. It must initially be professed “by everyone, always and everywhere.” Secondly, the dogmatic teaching of the Church is formulated gradually. From the original truth, writes Vincent, dogma is developed. This dialectic of initial determination and subsequent development is extremely important for understanding the theological essence of Christianity.

Christianity is not a law or justification by works, Christianity is a dogmatic religiosity. Vincent’s words about the reasons that prompted him to take up theology after entering the monastery are extremely important. “What motivates me to do this is not only the benefits of work, but also the time in which we live and the place in which we find ourselves.” “Time steals everything human,” writes the Father of the Church. Therefore, it is our duty to «steal time from time» for the benefit of eternal life. In our time, this thought of Saint Vincent is important as a patristic aphorism, apothegm, commandment, and an unusually relevant teaching.
