# SAINT POTHINUS OF LYONS

The life's work of the great saint of the 20th century, St. John of Shanghai (1896–1966), was to glorify the ancient Orthodox Western saints. Saint John grieved that many of them were previously venerated in the Ancient Church, but due to the fact that their names were not included in the general liturgical calendar in time, their memory was forgotten. It is possible that to many this zeal of Bishop John for the veneration of the ancient saints during his lifetime seemed incomprehensible. But now we know that by the power of the Holy Spirit this work continues. The names of the saints are included in the monthly calendar, and in the abroad dioceses of our Church real work is being carried out to restore their veneration. One of these ancient great righteous people was the holy martyr Pothinus of Lyons (87-177). His name was included in the liturgical calendar of our Church in 2017 exactly seven years ago. The memory of the saint is celebrated on his birthday, as Christians called the days of the death of martyrs, June 15 (June 2).

Saint Pothinus came from Asia Minor. It was from there that Christian missionaries first came to the territory of modern France, which was then the Roman province of Gaul. The first centers of the gospel were the cities of Vienne and Lyon. Like his successor at the head of the Lyons Church, Irenaeus, Pothinus was a disciple of Polycarp of Smyrna, who personally heard John the Theologian. The first Christian communities were Greek-speaking. Around 177, a pagan mob rioted against Christians. Accusing them of being foreigners and despising the Roman gods, the pagans prohibited Christians from accessing all public places, which then included baths and medical institutions. In modern terms, the pagans not only persecuted Christians, but tried to dehumanize them. Next, taking advantage of the absence of the local ruler, they began direct extermination. Under these circumstances, Pothinus was captured and, in the image of the three-day Resurrection of the Lord Jesus from the dead, died in prison on the third day. He was ninety years old. The day of veneration of Saint Pothinus and other ancient Gali martyrs, celebrated on these June days, reminds us of the will of Saint John of Shanghai to preserve the memory of the ancient saints.
