# SATURDAY OF SOULS BEFORE PENTECOST

The philosopher Jacques Derrida (1930-2004) was a postmodern thinker. He dealt with the deconstruction of words and thoughts. The philosopher Hans-Georg Gadamer (1900-2002) was "the father of philosophical hermeneutics." He dealt with the interpretation of words and thoughts. Gadamer was born in 1900, and Derrida in 1930. When Gadamer died in 2002, at the age of 102, Derrida was criticized. Because he never engaged in a dialogue with Gadamer. For a philosopher of his caliber, this seemed strange. Derrida's response was: "I simply got used to him being alive." In 2004, just two years later, Derrida himself died. One of the obituaries read: "The last philosopher is dead."

On the day the Orthodox Church celebrates a universal commemoration of all the dead on the eve of Pentecost, we can learn a lesson from this story. After all, everyone gets used to everything, even to things that shouldn't become habitual.... In fact, we get used to the fact that our loved ones are still alive. We also get used to the fact that the dead are dead. But it shouldn't be like that. Great days of remembrance help us break the habit of living in such habits.

How should it be? What should a Christian be able to say? “We remember our departed loved ones. We don't forget those who are no longer with us. We remember them by name. We don't automatically remember their names just because we have included them on our prayer lists. But each time, spontaneously, through an effort of will and memory, we remember them anew.” This is how it should be really, and not in some ideal.

Those who are no longer remembered and for whom no one else can pray are especially remembered by the Church on the days of general commemoration of all the departed, on universal parental Saturdays. This is the main purpose of these days in the Orthodox Church, because other departed, who are remembered by their relatives, are often remembered by name during various liturgical services.

“Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us,” says the Our Father. This great prayer does not only speak of sins. On the day when the Church remembers all the dead, the final petition of the Our Father expands and takes on a new form. “Our Father, always remember us and never forget us, for we always remember our dead and always pray for them.”
