# SYNAXIS OF SAINT JOHN THE BAPTIST

Similar to the five senses of man in ancient belief, the Orthodox calendar has five holidays in honor of John the Baptist in worship. These are the Conception and Nativity, the Beheading, associated with the memory of his earthly ministry, and the first-second, and third Finding of the Head of the Baptist, as a sign of his extraordinary veneration after death. The Synaxis of John the Forerunner on the day after Epiphany seems secondary. In fact, many Orthodox believers named after John the Baptist celebrate their name day on this day, and this celebration itself, among the many feasts of John, is a great and significant exception, full of meaning.

1 On January 20, the Orthodox Church celebrates the Synaxis of St. John the Baptist. This is a very ancient celebration, established as far back as the fourth century. Unlike other significant holidays in honor of John—the Conception and Nativity—which owe their origin to the counting of time from Christmas, the Synaxis of John is dedicated to the veneration of John as a biblical saint, prophet, and preacher who, through baptism, blessed the beginning of the earthly ministry of the Lord Jesus.

2 The word “Synaxis” in this case does not refer to any church building or gathering, as its sound in Slavic languages might suggest, but to worship. Ancient Christians sought to receive communion daily, but the divine liturgy was not always performed, only on certain days. “Synaxis of John the Baptist” means a calendar obligation, prescribed in the statutes of the local Church, Jerusalem or Constantinople, to celebrate the Eucharist on this day with a large number of believers and under the leadership of the first hierarchs.
