# THALLELAIOS, ALEXANDER AND ASTERIOS

June 2 (May 20) The Church celebrates the memory of the holy martyrs Thallelaios, Alexander and Asterius. The saints suffered for Christ during the reign of the Roman emperor Numerian (283–284). Saint Thallelaios is one of the very few ancient saints commemorated as doctors, healers and miracle workers. In the Ancient Church, the veneration of the saint was enormous. Because of his suffering in the area of ​​the modern large Turkish city of Adana, the saint is also called Thallelaios of Aegeae.

According to his life, Thallelaois was a native of Lebanon. The names of his parents have reached us: Beroukias and Romylia. Since the text does not speak of his conversion, it can be assumed that they were Christians and raised him in the faith. Thallelaios was a physician by profession.

The ruler of the Mediterranean city of Aegeae, in the modern region of Yumurtalik in the historical region of Cilicia in the southeast of modern Turkey, ordered his soldiers to look for Christians. Since Numerian's reign was very short, it can be assumed that the persecution of Christians was local in nature. Perhaps it was associated with a sudden outbreak of popular anger, because pagans often brought various absurd accusations against Christians. Often these were atheism and disdain for Roman values.

That's when Thallelaios was captured and interrogated for the first time. Released, he hid in an olive grove near the neighboring city of Anazarbus, also in Cilicia. It reminds us that in the life of every saint there was a significant moment of imitation of the Lord Jesus. It is obvious that Thallelaois knew that the persecution would continue. Having already experienced biased interrogation, he understood that he could not avoid reprisals. Therefore, from the olive trees, like Christ in Gethsemane, he hastened towards a gracious destiny, the name of which is God’s predestination for the saints.

Apparently, his appearance in this new place aroused inevitable suspicion. He was arrested again and returned to Aegeae for trial. The servants, whose names were Asterius and Alexander, were assigned to torture the saint. But perseverance in enduring suffering and refusal to renounce their faith led them to profess Christianity. Out of compassion, they tried to reduce the severity of his suffering. For which they were convicted and beheaded.

The pagans tried to drown the saint, but when they failed, they threw him to the beasts. But the animals did not touch the martyr. As happened with the saints, in the merciful doctor they felt a kindred heavenly human soul. Seeing the saint's deliverance from the suffering intended for him, the pagans accused the Christian of magic. At the end of his martyrdom, the saint was beheaded. His steadfastness in confession and the accompanying signs that happened through the power of grace led those around him to faith in Christ.

Then, together with Alexander, Asterius and Thallelaios, Macarius, who once taught the saint medicine, as well as Asteron, Philagrius, Timothy, and the wives of Theodula and Macaria, suffered martyrdom. According to the conviction of the Ancient Church, they became Christians in baptism of blood. On the day of remembrance of St Thallelaios, these martyrs are also worthy of remembrance with a request for heavenly intercession. In accordance with the tradition of the Ancient Church, we call them “Holy Thallelaios and his companions.” Ancient liturgical calendars contain various dates of their memory.

In addition to the life of Saint Thallelaios, ancient written evidence of his veneration has reached us. Thus, a very authoritative author, Bishop Severus of Antioch (465–538), dedicated a sermon to the saint at his resting place in Aegeae. The ancient historian Procopius of Caesarea, in his work “On Buildings” (5;9;1), says that Emperor Justinian (527–565) built the monasteries of St. Thallelaios and St. Panteleimon in Palestine. A church dedicated to the martyr existed in Bithynia. A church dedicated to the martyr existed in Bithynia. Evidence of the widespread church veneration of the saint in the Orthodox East was the existence of a martyrium in his memory in Constantinople.

According to one explanation, the name Thallelaios is derived from olive and oil. Nowadays, the saint is called upon in prayer for the sick and in the sacrament of unction. This means that for many, Saint Thallelaios becomes the guardian angel of the last moment. He will accompany us to the house of the Heavenly Father.
