# VIRGIN MARTYR SERAPHIMA OF ROME

Saint Seraphima is one of the earliest ancient Christian martyrs. Her feast day is only ten days after the feast of Seraphim of Sarov. Grace is communication. Belief in the Communion of Saints is postulated in the Apostles' Creed. Seraphim of Sarov and Seraphima of Rome - a saint of the early Church and a saint of the last hour - are a wonderful revelation of such a mysterious grace.

1 St. Seraphima is a very early martyr. She suffered for Christ in 119 during the reign of Emperor Hadrian (117-138). Under the pretext of protecting public order, he continued the policy of his predecessor Trajan and persecuted Christians. By that time, it had become obvious to the Romans that Christians and Jews were not the same thing, and therefore the status of a legal ancient religion that the latter enjoyed did not apply to Christians. They became subject to persecution. The only concession for him was that it was not encouraged to arbitrarily search for Christians. They were to be judged and punished upon denunciation, or when their Christian confession became obvious to everyone.

2 Saint Seraphima was a servant of Sabina, the widow of the senator Valentinus and the daughter of a certain rich Roman Herod Metallarius, whose name may indicate closeness to the clan of Herod himself. She was from Antioch. This city was the logistical center of the apostolic mission. From there, the Apostles themselves first departed, and then their disciples to preach throughout the world. Seraphima appeared in Rome with her parents, who may have been secret evangelists. After their death, she sold her estate, gave it to the local church for the needs of the poor, and then sold herself into slavery and thus became part of the household of Sabina, whom she converted to Christianity. Having dedicated herself to the One God in her virginity, she was arrested on denunciation. For refusing to perform a pagan sacrifice, Seraphima was given over to two young men to be desecrated. But she did not submit to them. In a rage, they mutilated her with flaming torches and then beheaded her.

3 The name of the saint is often transmitted in another version, as Serapia. If she was called Serapia, then this name comes from the pagan deity Serapis. But one way or another, this second name of the saint, Seraphima, meaning "flaming", became a prophetic personification of her martyrdom.

4 The Church celebrates the memory of the holy martyr Seraphim the Virgin on August 11, exactly ten days after St. Seraphim of Sarov. The opening of the relics of Saint Seraphim with a solemn service took place on July 19, 1903, which was timed to coincide with his birthday on this day in 1754. In the modern calendar, this is August 1. This is even more significant because there are no other saints with this name among ancient or even modern saints. I was unable to find information about who exactly St. Seraphim of Sarov was named after in monasticism. If in honor of the heavenly incorporeal forces, then such an abstract dedication of a monk to the highest angels is extremely rare. Formally, Saint Seraphim was a monk at the monastery in Sarov, but his life's work was the founding of a great women's monastery in Diveyevo. St. Seraphim of Sarov and the martyr Seraphim of Rome are an amazing example of the mysterious communion of saints.
